******************************************************************************
*                    SYMPHONY MPP Application                                * 
******************************************************************************

The SYMPHONY MPP application is a branch and cut solver for the standard Mixed
Postman Problem, with the generation of odd cut inequalities. See below for
usage.

******************************************************************************
*                              INSTALLATION                                  *
******************************************************************************

Please see the INSTALL file for a guide to compile SYMPHONY MPP application.

*******************************************************************************
*                      USING THE SOLVER                                       *
*******************************************************************************

The mixed postman problem (MPP) can be defined as finding a minimum cost path
by traversing all edges at least once on the graph that may contain both
undirected and directed edges.


To execute the MPP solver, you are just required to specify the location of
the data file by typing "-F 'filename'" as an argument after the executable
name. There is a sample file called sample.mpp that you can try to make sure
the solver is working. More data files may become available. Please check
http://www.branchandcut.org/MPP/ for more information. The other user defined
parameters are the following:

		-H: help (user switches)
		-F file: problem instance data is in 'file'

You can also obtain the above list by tying the executable name followed by
"-H". There are a number of other (for now) undocumented parameters that can
be used to fine-tune the performance of the solver. These must be set in a
parameter file. The SYMPHONY User's Manual explains the use of the parameter
file.

Some of SYMPHONY's native parameters can also be set on the command
line. Below is a list of these parameters. This list can also be obtained by
typing the executable name with no command-line arguments. Note that all
SYMPHONY parameters are denoted by a lowercase letter. Note that there are
dozens of other parameters that can be set with the use of a parameter
file. These parameters are listed in the SYMPHONY User's Manual.

		-h: help
        	-a: no cut timeout
        	-d: enable graph drawing
        	-g: use cut generator
        	-r: do repricing in root
        	-t: trim the tree
        	-b: don't perform branch and cut
        	-u ub: use upper bound 'ub'
        	-p procs: allow 'procs' active nodes
        	-n i: use node selection rule 'i'
        	-v i: set verbosity to level 'i'
        	-s cands: use 'cands' candidates for strong branching
        	-c i: use rule 'i' to compare candidates
        	-k i: use rule 'i' to select child
        	-m n: allow a max of 'n' cuts to enter per iteration
        	-e n: allow a max of 'n' cut pools
        	-l n k: load balance level 'n' and iterations 'k'
        	-i n: allow a max of 'n' iterations in presolve
        	-z n: set diving threshold to 'n'
        	-f file: read parameters from parameter file 'file'

AUTHORS

The SYMPHONY MPP application was developed by Andrew Hofmann (anh8@lehigh.edu).

BUG REPORTS

Please send bug reports to symphony-bugs@branchandcut.org.
